---
title: "Mastering NestJS: Your Ultimate Guide to Modern Backend Development"
description: Explore NestJS, a modern Node.js framework, in this comprehensive introduction. Join our series to master modular architecture, controllers, providers, services, and more. Build scalable backend applications with confidence. Welcome to Part 1 of the NestJS Series!
tags: [ Nest-JS, Mirco-service, API ]
topics: [ nest-js, backend ]
date: 2023-08-23
slug: introducing-2.nest-js-framework
img: "https://res.cloudinary.com/dpdwhd6ka/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto/v1/Blog/articles/nest-js/nestjs"
---

## Introduction

Welcome to this NestJS Series! Are you a developer searching for a powerful, efficient, and well-structured
framework for creating scalable server-side applications? NestJS is the way to go! We'll walk you through the principles
of NestJS, a modern, progressive Node.js framework that adds structure and maintainability to your backend projects, in
this series of articles. By the end of this series, you'll have a good understanding of every facet of NestJS and be
ready to confidently construct complex apps.

## What is NestJS?

NestJS is a Node.js-based backend framework that includes best practices from a variety of programming paradigms,
including Object-Oriented Programming (OOP), Functional Programming (FP), Reactive Programming, and others. It relies on
TypeScript, a superset of JavaScript that allows for optional static typing as well as implementation and other advanced
language capabilities.

NestJS's primary goals are modularity, re-usability, and testability. It enables developers to build clean, maintainable
code by implementing a structured scheme for annoyance isolation. Anyone who has worked with the popular frontend
framework Angular will know the framework.

## Key Features of NestJS

1. **Modular Architecture**

   NestJS's applications are built using modules that encapsulate related functionality. This modular approach
   encourages
   code re-usability and simplifies

2. **Controllers and Routes**
   Controllers receive incoming requests and handle them by processing the incoming data and returning the appropriate
   responses. Routes are defined within controllers, making it easy to map URLs to specific actions.

3. **Providers and Dependency Injection**

   Providers are classes that can be injected into controllers, services, and other components. This enables the
   creation of loosely coupled and highly testable code.

4. **Services**

   Services are responsible for business logic and can be shared across different parts of the application. They are
   injected into controllers and other services using dependency injection.

5. **Middleware**

   Middleware functions can be used to process incoming requests before they reach the route handler. This is useful for
   tasks such as authentication, logging, and validation.

6. **Interceptors**

   Interceptors are used to modify the request or response objects globally or for a specific route handler. They're
   great for tasks like data transformation and error handling.

7. **Exception Filters**

   Exception filters handle exceptions that are thrown during request processing. They allow you to customize error
   responses and centralize error handling.

8. **Pipes and Validation**

   Pipes are used to transform and validate data before it reaches the route handler. NestJS includes built-in
   validation mechanisms to ensure data integrity.

9. **Guards**

   Guards are used to control access to routes based on certain conditions. They're commonly used for authentication and
   authorization purposes.

## Setting Up a NestJS Project

To get started with NestJS, follow these steps:

1. **Install Node.js and npm**

   Ensure you have Node.js and npm (Node Package Manager) installed on your system.

2. **Install Nest CLI**

   Install the Nest Command Line Interface globally using the following npm command

   ```shell [bash]
    npm i -g @nestjs/cli
   ```
3. **Create a New Project**

   Use the Nest CLI to create a new NestJS project. Navigate to your desired directory and run the following command

   ```shell [bash]
    nest new project-name
   ```

4. **Explore the Project Structure**

   Once the project is created, explore the directory structure. You'll find modules, controllers, services, and other
   essential files organized for you.

5. **Run the Application**

   Use the following command to start your NestJS application

   ```shell [bash]
    npm run start
   ```

## NestJS project structure

When you use the Nest CLI to create a new project, it generates a default project structure like this:

::post-image
---
source: https://res.cloudinary.com/dpdwhd6ka/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto/v1/Blog/articles/nest-js/rkzow8crvsm7yupwbxer
alt: NestJs project file structure
---
::

Let's take a closer look at each of these components:

- __node_modules__ Directory: folder is where Node.js and npm store all the external dependencies required by your
  project. These
  dependencies include libraries, modules, and frameworks that provide additional functionality and features. You don't
  need to create or manage this folder manually—it's automatically generated and maintained by npm.
- __src__ Directory: This directory contains your application's source code
    - *app.controller.spec.ts*: contains a test suit that accompanies the app.controller.ts file. It's used to write
      unit tests for the actions provided by the AppController class.
    - *app.controller.ts*: a sample controller that handles incoming requests and defines routes.
    - *app.module.ts*: is considered as the root module of your application. It imports and coordinates other modules,
      controllers, and services.
    - *app.service.ts*: a sample service that contains business logic. Services are responsible for handling the
      application's core features.
    - *main.ts*: the entry point of your application. It initializes the Nest application and starts the server.
- __test__ Directory: This directory is intended for unit tests. Note that, NestJS encourages a test-driven development
  approach.
- __.eslint.js__: Eslint configuration file
- __.gitignore__: used to specify files and directories that should be ignored by Git when tracking changes in a
  repository
- __.prettierrc__: Prettier configuration file
- __nest-cli.json__: The configuration file for the Nest CLI. You can define various options for your project here.
- __package-lock.json__: Used by Node.js to lock the versions of dependencies and their sub-dependencies, ensuring that
  the same versions are installed consistently across different environments. It's automatically generated by npm when
  you install, update, or remove packages
- __package.json__: The standard Node.js package configuration file. It lists the project's dependencies, scripts, and
  another metadata.
- __tsconfig.build.json__: Specifies configurations to use when building your Nest project.
- __tsconfig.json__: The TypeScript configuration file. It specifies how TypeScript should transpile your code.

Here we are. You know have a full description of a fresh NestJS project structure.

## Next in the Series

In the upcoming articles in this NestJS Series, we will dive deep into each of the key features and concepts mentioned
above. We'll explore how to create modules, define controllers and routes, work with providers and dependency injection,
build robust services, implement middleware and interceptors, handle exceptions and validation, and secure your
application using guards. By the end of this series, you'll have a comprehensive understanding of NestJS and be equipped
to create powerful backend applications with ease.

Stay tuned for Part 2 of this NestJS Series, where we'll dive into the world of services, modules, and controllers!


