---
title: Setting Up a 3-Node MongoDB Replica Set Cluster with Docker Compose
description: "How to set up a 3-node MongoDB replica set cluster using Docker Compose. Learn about MongoDB replica sets, prerequisites, and steps to create a Docker Compose file to set up the replica set."
tags: [ MongoDB, Replica-Set, Docker, Docker-compose ]
topics: [ devops, docker, mongodb ]
date: 2024-07-17
slug: set-up-mongodb-replica-set-with-docker
img: "https://res.cloudinary.com/dpdwhd6ka/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto/v1/Blog/articles/mongodb-replicaset"
---

## Introduction

In this blog post, I'll walk you through setting up a 3-node MongoDB replica set cluster using Docker Compose. This
guide will assume you're familiar with basic Docker concepts such as Docker Compose, volumes, networks, and health 
checks, as well as MongoDB concepts like replica sets. So, if you're ready, let's dive in!

## What is a MongoDB Replica Set?

::post-image
---
source: https://res.cloudinary.com/dpdwhd6ka/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto/v1/Blog/articles/how-to/nye35wpkfcy8fivg5qlv
alt: Successful restored backup
className: h-auto max-w-xs mx-auto
---
::

A mongoDB replica set is a group of mongoDB instances that host the same data set. In a replica set, one node is the
primary node that receives all write operations. All other nodes, known as secondary nodes, apply operations from the
primary so that they have the same data set.

MongoDB replica sets offer redundancy and high availability, keeping the database operational even if one or more nodes
die. They replicate data across multiple nodes to ensure integrity and availability.


### Why Use a MongoDB Replica Set?

1- **High Availability**: If the primary node fails, a secondary node can be elected as the new primary, ensuring that the database remains available.

2- **Data Redundancy**: Data is replicated across multiple nodes, ensuring data integrity and availability.

3- **Read Scalability**: Secondary nodes can serve read operations, distributing the read load across multiple nodes.

4- **Automatic Failover**: If the primary node fails, a secondary node is automatically elected as the new primary node.

For further reading about MongoDB replication, check out the official MongoDB documentation on [replica sets](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/).

## Setting Up a 3-Node MongoDB Replica Set Cluster with Docker Compose

### Prerequisites

In this guide, we'll use Docker Compose to set up a 3-node MongoDB replica set cluster. Before you start, make sure you
have Docker and Docker Compose installed on your machine. If you don't have them installed, you can download them from
the official [Docker website](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/).

You may also need to have a basic understanding of MongoDB and mongo shell commands. If you're new to MongoDB, you can
check out the official MongoDB documentation on [MongoDB CRUD Operations](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/crud/).

### Step 1: Create a Docker Compose File

Begin by creating a `docker-compose.yml` file in a new directory. This file will define the services for the MongoDB
containers. We'll create:

- three services: `mongo1`, `mongo2`, and `mongo3`; 
- a network called `mongo-cluster`; and
- three volumes: `mongo1-data`, `mongo2-data`, and `mongo3-data`.

Let's dot it:

```yaml [docker-compose.yml]
networks:
  mongo-cluster:
    driver: bridge
    
volume:
  mongo1-data:
  mongo2-data:
  mongo3-data:

services:
  mongo1:
    container_name: mongo_rs0
    image: mongo:7.0-jammy
    hostname: mongo1
    command: ["--replSet", "rs0", "--bind_ip", "127.0.0.1,mongo1", "--port", "27017", "--keyFile", "/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile"]
    volumes:
      - mongo1-data:/data/db
      - $PWD/scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile:/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile
      - $PWD/scripts/mongo/init.js:/docker-entrypoint-initdb.d/init-mongo.js
    ports:
      - 27017:27017
    networks:
      - mongo-cluster
    healthcheck:
      test: echo "try {rs.status()} catch(err) {rs.initiate({_id:'rs0',members:[{_id:0,host:'mongo1:27017',priority:1},{_id:1,host:'mongo2:27018',priority:0.5},{_id:2,host:'mongo3:27019',priority:0.5}]})}" | mongosh --port 27017 -u '${MONGO_ADMIN_USER:-admin}' -p '${MONGO_ADMIN_PASSWD:-veryStringPassword}' --authenticationDatabase admin --quiet
      interval: 5m
      timeout: 10s
      retries: 3
      start_period: 10s
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: '${MONGO_ADMIN_USER:-admin}'
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: '${MONGO_ADMIN_PASSWD:-veryStringPassword}'
      MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE: '${DB_NAME:-test}'
      DB_USERNAME: ${DB_USERNAME:-myuser}
      DB_PASSWORD: ${DB_PASSWORD:-mypassword}
  mongo2:
    container_name: mongo_rs1
    image: mongo:7.0-jammy
    hostname: mongo2
    command: ["--replSet", "rs0", "--bind_ip", "127.0.0.1,mongo2", "--port", "27018", "--keyFile", "/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile"]
    volumes:
      - mongo2-data:/data/db
      - $PWD/scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile:/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile
    ports:
      - 27018:27017
    networks:
      - mongo-cluster
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: '${MONGO_ADMIN_USER:-admin}'
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: '${MONGO_ADMIN_PASSWD:-veryStringPassword}'
  mongo3:
    container_name: mongo_rs2
    image: mongo:7.0-jammy
    hostname: mongo3
    command: ["--replSet", "rs0", "--bind_ip", "127.0.0.1,mongo3", "--port", "27019", "--keyFile", "/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile"]
    volumes:
      - mongo3-data:/data/db
      - $PWD/scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile:/etc/mongodb/pki/keyfile
    ports:
      - 27019:27017
    networks:
      - mongo-cluster
    environment:
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME: '${MONGO_ADMIN_USER:-admin}'
      MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD: '${MONGO_ADMIN_PASSWD:-veryStringPassword}'

```

Let's break down the `docker-compose.yml` file:

- We define a network called `mongo-cluster` that will be used by all the MongoDB containers. This ensures that the
  containers can communicate with each other through the hostnames `mongo1`, `mongo2`, and `mongo3`.
- We define three volumes: `mongo1-data`, `mongo2-data`, and `mongo3-data` to persist the data for each MongoDB
  container.
- We define three services: `mongo1`, `mongo2`, and `mongo3`. Each service runs a MongoDB container with the
  `mongo:7.0-jammy` image. We specify the `--replSet` option to set the replica set name to `rs0`. We also specify the
  `--bind_ip` option to bind the container to the hostnames `mongo1`, `mongo2`, and `mongo3`. We mount the volumes to
  persist the data and the keyfile for authentication. We expose the ports `27017`, `27018`, and `27019` for the MongoDB
  containers. We define a health check for the `mongo1` service to check the status of the replica set and initiate it
  if it's not already initiated.  After the healthcheck is successful, the replica set is initiated with the primary node
  `mongo1` and secondary nodes `mongo2` and `mongo3`.
- We set the environment variables `MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_USERNAME`, `MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD`, `MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE`,
  `DB_USERNAME`, and `DB_PASSWORD` for each service to configure the MongoDB authentication. We're using interpolation
  to make sure the default values are used if the environment variables are not set.

### Step 2: Create a Keyfile for Authentication

MongoDB uses keyfiles for internal authentication between members of the replica set. In a certain scenario where
credentials are not set, we would not need it. But for the sake of this guide, we need to create a keyfile and mount it
to the MongoDB containers, since we're using authentication.

To create a keyfile, run the following command:

```bash
openssl rand -base64 756 > scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile && chmod 400 scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile
```

This command generates a random 756-byte key and saves it to the `scripts/mongo/rs_keyfile` file. We then set the file
permissions to `400` to ensure that only the owner `mongodb:mongodb` can read and write to the file. You can read more
about keyfiles in the [MongoDB documentation](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/deploy-replica-set-with-keyfile-access-control/).

> Note: the keyfile is used for internal authentication between members of the replica set. It's important to keep the keyfile secure and not expose it to unauthorized users.

### Step 3: Create an Initialization Script

As I mentioned earlier, we'll set up an initial database, username and password for the MongoDB replica set. To do so we'll
use an initialization script that will be executed when the MongoDB container starts. Now, create a file called
`init.js` in the `scripts/mongo` directory with the following content:

```javascript [scripts/mongo/init.js]
db = db.getSiblingDB(process.env.MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE)

db.createUser({ 
    user: process.env.DB_USERNAME,
    pwd: process.env.DB_PASSWORD,
    roles: [{ role: 'readWrite', db: process.env.MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE }] 
}, { w: 'majority', wtimeout: 5000 });
```

Let's break down the `init.js` file:
- We connect to the database specified by the `MONGO_INITDB_DATABASE` environment variable.
- We create a user specified by the `DB_USERNAME` and `DB_PASSWORD` environment variables with the `readWrite` role on the
  database.
- We set the write concern to `majority` with a timeout of `5000` milliseconds. This ensures that the write operation is
  acknowledged by the majority of the replica set members.

This script will be executed when the MongoDB container starts, creating the initial database and user for the replica
set. Note that the script part is not mandatory, and you could use hardcoded values. However, according to the [section
III of the 12-factor app](https://12factor.net/config), it's better to use environment variables to store secrets or anything that may vary between
deployments.

### Step 4: Start the MongoDB Replica Set Cluster

Now that we have everything set up, we can start the MongoDB replica set cluster using Docker Compose by running the 
following command:

```bash
docker-compose up -d
```

> Note: The `-d` flag runs the containers in detached mode, which means they will run in the background.

### Step 5: Verify the MongoDB Replica Set

To verify that the MongoDB replica set is running correctly, you can use the `mongo` shell to connect to the primary
node and check the status of the replica set. Run the following command to connect to the primary node:

```bash
docker exec -it mongo_rs0 mongosh -u admin -p veryStringPassword --authenticationDatabase admin
```

> Note: Replace `veryStringPassword` with the password you set for the `MONGO_INITDB_ROOT_PASSWORD` environment variable. If you didn't set it, use `veryStringPassword`.

Once connected, run the following command to check the status of the replica set:

```bash
rs.status()
```

You should see the status of the replica set with the primary node `mongo1` and the secondary nodes `mongo2` and `mongo3`.
The output should like:

```json
members: [
    {
      _id: 0,
      name: 'mongo1:27017',
      health: 1,
      state: 1,
      stateStr: 'PRIMARY',
      uptime: 478,
      electionTime: Timestamp({ t: 1721354075, i: 1 }),
      electionDate: ISODate('2024-07-19T01:54:35.000Z'),
        ...
    },
    {
      _id: 1,
      name: 'mongo2:27018',
      health: 1,
      state: 2,
      stateStr: 'SECONDARY',
      uptime: 471,
      syncSourceHost: 'mongo1:27017',
        ...
    },
    {
      _id: 2,
      name: 'mongo3:27019',
      health: 1,
      state: 2,
      stateStr: 'SECONDARY',
      uptime: 471,
      syncSourceHost: 'mongo1:27017',
        ...
    }
  ],
  ok: 1,
  '$clusterTime': {
    clusterTime: Timestamp({ t: 1721354536, i: 1 }),
    signature: {
      hash: Binary.createFromBase64('8KKPt/SmHkhGZDH299+yq6j5i04=', 0),
      keyId: Long('7393159456961331205')
    }
  },
```

> Note: This is a truncated output, and it may vary depending on the version of MongoDB you're using.

## Bonus: Add Mongo-Express for Web-based Administration

Let's add a web-based administration tool for MongoDB, by using `mongo-express`. To add `mongo-express` to the Docker 
Compose file, add the following service definition:

```yaml [docker-compose.yml]
mongo-express:
  container_name: mongo-express:latest
  image: mongo-express
  ports:
    - 8081:8081
  networks:
    - mongo-cluster
  environment:
    ME_CONFIG_BASICAUTH: false
    ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ENABLE_ADMIN: true
    ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINUSERNAME: '${MONGO_ADMIN_USER:-admin}'
    ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_ADMINPASSWORD: '${MONGO_ADMIN_PASSWD:-veryStringPassword}'
    ME_CONFIG_MONGODB_URL: mongodb://${DB_USERNAME:-myuser}:${DB_PASSWORD:-veryStringPassword}@mongo1:27017,mongo2:27018,mongo3:27019/${DB_NAME}?replicaSet=rs0

```

And voilà, you have a MongoDB replica set cluster with a web-based administration tool! You can access `mongo-express`
at `http://localhost:8081` in your browser.

> Note: To connect your application to the MongoDB replica set, you can use the connection string `mongodb://${DB_USERNAME:-myuser}:${DB_PASSWORD:-veryStringPassword}@mongo1:27017,mongo2:27018,mongo3:27019/${DB_NAME}?replicaSet=rs0`. 
Also make sure to replace the `DB_USERNAME`, `DB_PASSWORD`, and `DB_NAME` with your application's credentials by setting the environment variables in the `.env` file.

## Conclusion

In this article, I walked you through setting up a 3-node MongoDB replica set cluster using Docker Compose. We covered
the basics of MongoDB replica sets, the prerequisites for setting up a replica set, and the steps to create a Docker
Compose file to set up the replica set. I also showed you how to verify the replica set and add a web-based administration
tool using `mongo-express`. I hope this guide helps you get started with MongoDB replica sets and Docker Compose.

In a future post, I'll talk about something more important: how to back up, and restore a MongoDB database in a Docker
environment. You may have heard that Docker containers are ephemeral, so it's important to have a backup strategy in
place to avoid data loss. Stay tuned for that!

If you have any questions or feedback, feel free to reach out to me. Happy coding!

## References

- [MongoDB Replica Set Documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/replication/)
- [Docker Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/)
- [Docker Compose Documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
- [MongoDB CRUD Operations](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/crud/)
- [Docker Volumes](https://docs.docker.com/storage/volumes/)
- [Docker Networks](https://docs.docker.com/network/)
- [Docker Health Checks](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/builder/#healthcheck)
- [Mongo-Express](https://github.com/mongo-express/mongo-express)

