---
title: My Journey to AWS Cloud Practitioner Certification
description: Follow my journey to AWS Cloud Practitioner Certification—an exploration of cloud concepts, exam success, and the boundless opportunities in the world of AWS.
tags: [ AWS, Certification ]
topics: [ cloud ]
date: 2023-11-09
slug: how-i-passed-aws-cloud-practitioner-exam
img: "https://res.cloudinary.com/dpdwhd6ka/image/upload/f_auto,q_auto/v1/Blog/badges/eondglodvvgm9s9gietk"
---

## Introduction

After weeks of dedicated study and hard work, I'm thrilled to announce that I've recently achieved a major milestone in
my career. I'm now an AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner! This certification has opened up a world of opportunities in the
cloud computing industry, and I'm excited to share my journey and insights with you.

View
my [verified achievement](https://www.credly.com/badges/1a490efa-6214-427a-964a-eca1e6898685/public_url "Creedly verified badge")

## Why Amazon Web Services (AWS)

Do you wonder why AWS? It all began with my intense fascination with cloud computing and the rising need in the labor
market for cloud experts. Amazon Web Services has revolutionized the way we think about computing, storage, and
scalability.

1. **Comprehensive services portfolio**

   With the widest range of cloud services available, AWS is the best option for companies of all sizes and sectors. It
   offers everything from compute, network, storage, databases, to machine learning and more.
2. **Global Presence**

   AWS offers low latency and high availability to customers and organizations globally, with data centers and regions
   located all over the world, ensuring redundancy and expanding applications require this worldwide reach.
3. **Reliability and Security**

   AWS has a track record of reliability and security. From healthcare to financial services, it drives some of the
   most important workloads in the world. AWS is a reliable option because of its strong security features and
   compliance certifications.

4. **A Strong Community and Support**

   The AWS community is vast and vibrant, offering a wealth of resources, forums, and documentation. You can find
   support and solutions to your cloud challenges.

In summary, AWS is not just a cloud provider; it's a leader in the industry, offering the most comprehensive, reliable,
and innovative cloud solutions. Choosing AWS is a strategic move that can propel your career and business to new heights
in the world of cloud computing.

## The Cloud Practitioner Certification Objectives

The AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner (CLF-C02) exam is intended for individuals who can effectively demonstrate overall
knowledge of the AWS Cloud, independent of a specific job role. The exam validates a candidate’s ability to complete the
following tasks:

- Explain the value of the AWS Cloud.
- Understand and explain the AWS shared responsibility model.
- Understand security best practices.
- Understand AWS Cloud costs, economics, and billing practices.
- Describe and position the core AWS services, including compute, network, database, and storage services.
- Identify AWS services for common use cases.

### The AWS Cloud Practitioner Curriculum

The Exam curriculum covers up to four domains which are:

1. **Cloud Concepts** (24% of scored content)

   It is necessary to have a fundamental understanding of cloud computing concepts to pass the AWS Cloud Practitioner
   exam. This domain covers a wide range of subjects, including elasticity, scalability, fault tolerance, and high
   availability.

2. **Security and compliance** (30% of scored content)

   Another crucial subject for candidates to AWS Cloud Practitioner exam is security. This domain covers a range of
   issues with security, compliance, and accountable management.

3. **Cloud Technology and Services** (34% of scored content)

   This domain is the most important of the AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner Exam. To be proficient in this part, you
   need to be familiar with the primary AWS services such as EC2, RDS, EC2, S3, Lambda

4. **Billing, Pricing, and Support** (12% of scored content)

   You must have a basic understanding of AWS Cloud economics, AWS Billing and Cost Management, AWS support plans, the
   types of charges, billing processes and how services are billed, the consolidated billing and more.

## Study resources

Preparing for the AWS Cloud Practitioner exam involves setting a study schedule, breaking down the topics, and setting
goals. Consistency is key, and I recommend dedicating time each day to study. In addition, make use of AWS white papers
and documentation to deepen your knowledge. One of the key factors that contributed to my success was the availability
of excellent study resources. Here are some of the resources I used:

### AWS Training lessons

- **AWS Cloud Practitioner Essentials**: This course is for anyone who seeks an overall understanding of the Amazon Web
  Services Cloud. You will learn about AWS Cloud concepts, AWS services, security, architecture, pricing, and support to
  build your AWS Cloud knowledge.
- **AWS Technical Essentials**: This course introduces you to essential Amazon Web Services and common solutions. It
  covers the fundamental AWS concepts related to compute, database, storage, networking, monitoring, and security.
- **AWS Cloud Quest: Cloud Practitioner**: AWS Cloud Quest is a role-playing game to help you build in-demand AWS Cloud
  skills.
- **KodeKloud AWS Cloud Practitioner (CLF-C02)**: This course was well-structured, and I gained valuable insights. The
  Billing & Pricing module was particularly enlightening, offering a concise view of AWS cost management.

### Get Familiar with AWS: AWS Free tier

AWS Free Tier is a program offered by Amazon Web Services that provides new AWS users with a limited amount of
free access to a variety of AWS services for 12 months. It allows you to explore and experiment with AWS cloud services
without incurring any charges, making it an excellent starting point for beginners and those looking to get hands-on
experience with AWS. AWS Free Tier is a great way to get started with AWS services.

### AWS Cloud Practitioner Free Practice test

The greatest way to assess your exam readiness and knowledge is to take practice exams. You should take advantage of the
free AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner practice exam if you want to achieve high scores. The format and substance of
these tests are intended to closely mimic the real exam.

## The Exam booking and the Exam day

To initiate the exam process, I had to book a time slot through the Pearson VUE website. The booking process was
straightforward, allowing me to choose a date and time that suited my schedule. Additionally, I needed to purchase an
exam voucher, which costs $100 USD. It's essential to note that the voucher price covers the exam cost.

There were a few crucial decisions to make, including the method of examination and the logistics of booking. I opted to
take the exam at a Pearson VUE test center, mainly because I wanted a controlled and focused environment. While the
option of a proctored exam from the comfort of home is available, I saw it as potentially distracting. The center
offered a quiet space dedicated to the exam, ensuring minimal disruptions.

The AWS Cloud Practitioner exam consists of 65 multiple-choice questions, and achieving a minimum score of 700 out of
1000 is required to pass. The questions cover a range of topics relevant to foundational AWS Cloud concepts. Upon
completing the exam, the results were available immediately. The instant feedback provided a sense of closure to the
exam experience, as the screen revealed whether I had passed or not.

Three days after successfully passing the exam, I received my digital badge on Creedly, a tangible symbol of my
accomplishment. Accompanying the badge was a congratulatory email containing valuable instructions and information on
the next steps in my AWS certification journey. This swift response from AWS added a personal touch to the certification
process, emphasizing their commitment to recognizing and celebrating the achievements of candidates.

## Outro

If you're considering pursuing an AWS certification, especially the AWS Cloud Practitioner, remember that you're not
alone in this journey. Feel free to reach out with any questions or for guidance. The world of AWS and cloud computing
is filled with endless possibilities, and I can't wait to see where it takes you.

## Conclusion

Finally, for anyone interested in cloud technology, the AWS Cloud Practitioner certification is a great place to start.
It gives you the fundamental information you need and provides access to a variety of career options in the cloud
computing area. As I rejoice in my accomplishment, I'm already actively preparing for the AWS Solutions Architect
Associate certification, a step I plan to take within the next six months. This ongoing commitment to learning and
growth reflects my dedication to staying at the forefront of cloud technology and furthering my expertise in the AWS
ecosystem.

I hope that my experience has motivated you to get your AWS certification. I wish you well and the realization of your
cloud computing goals.


